# WWSCAN Data Dictionary 

This data dictionary was originated from the [WWSCAN project](data.wastewaterscan.org).



## Data schema

**Filename:** summary-h5.csv


| Field                 | Format                       |Description                      
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
**sample_collected**      | YYYY-MM-DD  | Date sample was collected    | 
**state_name**      | String       | Full name of the State in which the collection site resides |
**state_id**      | String       | 2-letter from the ANSI standard INCITS 38:2009 (supersedes FIPS 5-2) |
**state_ansi**      | String       | 2-digit codes from the ANSI standard INCITS 38:2009 (supersedes FIPS 5-2) |
**county_name**      | String       | Full name of the County in which the collection site resides  |
**county_fips**      | String       | 5-digit FIPS code of the `county_name`. The first two digits correspond to the state's FIPS code.	 |
**city_name**      | String       | Full name of the City in which the collection site resides  | 
  **facility_name**      | String       | Full name of the collection site  | 
 **NPDES_ID**      | Numeric       | Unique identifier assigned to each collection site under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, which regulates pollutant discharges to waters of the United States |
 **FRS_ID**      | Numeric       | The Facility Registry Service (FRS) is a unique identifier assigned by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) system to track environmental facilities |
**facility_address**      | String       | Physical address of the collection site  | 
**watershed_HUC12**      | Numeric       | The identifier of the watershed in which the collection site is located, based on the Hydrologic Unit Code (HUC12)   | 
**lat_facility**      | Numeric       | Latitude of the collection site  |
**long_facility**      | Numeric       | Longitude of the collection site |
**major_minor_facility**      | String       | This field indicates whether the collection site is considered major (M) or minor (N) in terms of environmental importance or impact |
**facility_type**      | String       | The type of plant. For example, "POTW" (Publicly Owned Treatment Works) indicates a publicly owned wastewater treatment plant |
**quantity_nucleic_acids** | Numeric | 5-sample trimmed average (consensus-smoothed) quantity of H5 viral nucleic acids, normalized to Pepper Mild Mottle Virus (PPMoV) concentration (×1 million), as displayed on the WWSCAN data dashboard. Note: Although the data originates from the WWSCAN project, the `quantity_nucleic_acids` values were not taken from the raw data download. Instead, they were manually extracted from the dashboard’s smoothed (5-sample trimmed average) and normalized visualizations. As such, these values are derived metrics that reflect underlying trends rather than raw measurement data.|




## License and attribution
These data were generated by the WastewaterSCAN / SCAN projects, philanthropically funded through a gift to Stanford University. All results are understood to be based on inputs that are experimental in nature, and are not intended to diagnose or treat any disease. The results are provided “as is” and without warranty of any kind. Stanford is not liable for any claim arising out of or in connection with the disclosure of these results. By accessing or copying any part of the database, the user accepts the terms of this license. 

<br>These data are being made available to inform public health decision making. Anyone seeking to use the database for other purposes or for research is required to contact the WastewaterSCAN / SCAN team at wwscan_stanford_emory@lists.stanford.edu or Alexandria Boehm aboehm@stanford.edu. Any questions about the data, or the methods used to generate or produce any data products should be directed to the same emails. When the data are used in any format, the following attribution should be made: “These data were collected as part of the WastewaterSCAN / SCAN project, a partnership between Stanford University, Emory University, and Verily funded philanthropically through a gift to Stanford University.”</br>

<br>
In addition, the following paper should be cited: A. B. Boehm, M. K. Wolfe, Amanda L. Bidwell, Alessandro Zulli, Vikram-Chan-Herur, Bradley J. White, Bridgette Shelden, Dorothea Duong. 2024. Human pathogen nucleic acids in wastewater solids from 191 wastewater treatment plants in the United States. Scientific Data, 11, 1141. </br>


